
--- page 1 ---
This paper is included in the Proceedings of the  
24th USENIX Conference on File and Storage Technologies.
February 24–26, 2026 • Santa Clara, CA, USA
ISBN 978-1-939133-53-3
Open access to the Proceedings of the 
24th USENIX Conference on File and Storage Technologies  
is sponsored by
https://www.usenix.org/conference/fast26/presentation/liu-qingyuan
Sharpen the Spec, Cut the Code: A Case for 
Generative File System with SySSpec
Qingyuan Liu, Mo Zou, Hengbin Zhang, Dong Du, and Yubin Xia, and  
Haibo Chen, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
--- page 2 ---
Sharpen the Spec, Cut the Code: A Case for Generative File System with SYSSPEC
Qingyuan Liu, Mo Zou, Hengbin Zhang, Dong Du, Yubin Xia, Haibo Chen
Institute of Parallel and Distributed Systems
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Abstract
File systems are critical OS components that require con-
stant evolution to support new hardware and emerging applica-
tion needs. However, the traditional paradigm of developing
features, fixing bugs, and maintaining the system incurs sig-
nificant overhead, especially as systems grow in complexity.
This paper proposes a new paradigm,generative file systems,
which leverages Large Language Models (LLMs) to generate
and evolve a file system from prompts, effectively addressing
the need for robust evolution. Despite the widespread success
of LLMs in code generation, attempts to create a functional
file system have thus far been unsuccessful, mainly due to the
ambiguity of natural language prompts.
This paper introduces SYSSPEC, a framework for devel-
oping generative file systems. Its key insight is toreplace
ambiguous natural language with principles adapted from
formal methods. Instead of imprecise prompts, SYSSPEC
employs a multi-partspecificationthat accurately describes a
file system’s functionality, modularity, and concurrency. The
specification acts as an unambiguous blueprint, guiding LLMs
to generate expected code flexibly. To manage evolution, we
develop aDAG-structured patchthat operates on the specifica-
tion itself, enabling new features to be added without violating
existing invariants. Moreover, the SYSSPECtoolchain fea-
tures a set of LLM-based agents with mechanisms to mitigate
hallucination during construction and evolution. We demon-
strate our approach by generating SPECFS, a concurrent file
system. SPECFS demonstrates equivalent level of correct-
ness to that of a manually-coded baseline across hundreds
of regression tests. We further confirm its evolvability by
seamlessly integrating 10 real-world features from Ext4. Our
work shows that a specification-guided approach makes gen-
erating and evolving complex systems not only feasible but
also highly effective.
1 Introduction
File systems are a cornerstone of modern operating systems,
providing the critical abstractions for managing persistent
data. Their design is dictated by a symbiotic relationship
with two forces: the characteristics of underlying storage
hardware and the demands of ever-changing applications.
This relationship necessitates continuous evolution, driving
the creation of specialized file systems like F2FS for flash
memory [29] and EROFS for read-only mobile scenarios [22].
Consequently, file system developers are in a perpetual cycle
of adding features, optimizing performance, and resolving
bugs to keep pace with innovation.
However, this evolution comes at a steep price. To quantify
this challenge, we conduct a longitudinal study of the Ext4
file system’s development, analyzing all 3,157 commits from
its inception in Linux 2.6.19 to the recent 6.15 release. Our
analysis reveals that 82.4% of all commits are dedicated to
bug fixes and maintenance, which are a direct consequence of
introducing new functionality (which accounts for only 5.1%
of total commits). E.g., the recently merged “fast commits”
feature [41] required only 9 commits for its initial implemen-
tation, while it triggered about 80 subsequent commits to
address newly introduced bugs and maintain the code (§2.2).
This demonstrates a common development cycle where the
effort to stabilize new features far outweighs the initial imple-
mentation effort, placing a non-trivial burden on developers.
This motivates us to explore a new paradigm for file
system design and development,generative file systems,
which leverages the capabilities of Large Language Models
(LLMs) [1, 11, 33, 34, 48] to generate a complete file system
and evolve it effectively.
Nevertheless, although recent advancements in LLMs have
demonstrated their profound capabilities in automated code
generation [2, 3, 20, 24, 25, 49, 53, 54], generating a complete
and useful file system from natural-language prompts is pro-
foundly challenging, if not impossible. The intricate seman-
tics of file systems, from ensuring concurrency correctness
to carefully managing complex file structures, are difficult
to express unambiguously in prompts. Consequently, to our
knowledge, no prior LLM-based approach has successfully
generated a complete, functional, and feature-rich file system.
Compared with descriptions with natural language,spec-
ifications[38, 45] usually provide a precise and machine-
understandable language toexplicitly encodethese invariants
(e.g., no orphan inodes after a crash), creating an opportunity
to guide LLMs toward generating expected code. However,
bridging the gap between specifications and LLM-based code
generation is non-trivial. We identify three technical chal-
lenges that our work, SYSSPEC, is designed to overcome:
Challenge I: Specification semantic gap.A specification
must be expressive enough to capture the multifaceted se-
mantics of a file system, which natural language prompts
fail to do. This includes not only functional correctness but
USENIX Association 24th USENIX Conference on File and Storage Technologies    291
--- page 3 ---
2.6.192.6.202.6.212.6.222.6.232.6.242.6.252.6.262.6.272.6.282.6.292.6.302.6.312.6.322.6.332.6.342.6.352.6.362.6.372.6.382.6.393.03.13.23.43.53.63.73.83.93.103.113.123.153.163.173.184.04.14.24.34.44.54.74.84.94.114.144.164.184.194.205.05.15.25.35.45.55.65.75.85.95.105.115.125.135.145.155.165.175.185.196.06.16.26.36.46.56.66.76.86.96.106.116.126.136.146.15
Linux Kernel Versions
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175# Commits
Performance
Feature
Bug
Maintenance
Reliability
Commit
Count
LOC
47.2%
19.4%
35.2%
50.3%
5.1%
18.4%
6.9%
7.1%
5.5%
4.9%
Figure 1:File system evolution with different types of patches.
also non-functional properties critical for performance, such
as on-disk layout choices (e.g., bitmap vs. linear scan for
block allocation). Furthermore, precisely specifying complex
concurrency control is notoriously difficult. Attempting to
describe both functional logic and fine-grained locking in a
single, monolithic prompt can overwhelm an LLM, causing it
to overlook subtle but critical details and produce code with
concurrency bugs.
Challenge II: Complex component composition.The finite
context window of LLMs precludes generating an entire file
system monolithically. This necessitates a modular approach,
which introduces significant composition challenges. First,
generating one module at a time, an LLM lacks the global
context to ensure interface compatibility with other, yet-to-be-
generated or pre-existing components, leading to integration
errors. Second, each individual change (with LLMs) intro-
duced during the evolution process can potentially trigger
cascading effects on other file system modules, particularly
those with existing dependencies. For example, a seemingly
local feature addition, like introducing extent [4], can trigger
non-local changes by altering core data structures like the
inode, affecting any module that interacts with it and making
manual dependency management intractable.
Challenge III: Unreliable LLM capability.LLM-based
code generation is inherently non-deterministic due to the hal-
lucination [26, 50] — even identical specifications can yield
different and potentially incorrect code outputs across gen-
eration attempts. A naive “generate-and-pray” approach is
unacceptable for system software. Therefore, a robust frame-
work cannot blindly trust the LLM especially for file systems;
it must incorporate a rigorous validation mechanism to ensure
that generated code strictly adheres to the guiding specifica-
tion, guaranteeing correctness despite the unreliability.
To address these challenges, our key insight is toreplace
ambiguous natural language with specifications following
the principles adapted from successful practices of formal
methods[15, 42, 55]. Specifically, we introduce SYSSPEC, a
framework for correct-by-construction file system generation
built on three core techniques.
First, we design aformal method-inspired specification
to precisely define a file system’s behavior, moving beyond
the ambiguity of natural language. It holistically captures the
FS design, spanningFunctionality, defined through Hoare-
logic based pre/post-conditions [15, 55] and invariants;Mod-
ularity, which enforces a clean decomposition into modules
with rely-guarantee [31, 55] interfaces for correct composi-
tion; andConcurrency, which makes locking protocols and
ordering explicit to mitigate subtle bugs.
Second, SYSSPECprovides anLLM-based toolchainthat
translates the high-level specification into an executable C
implementation. The toolchain contains three LLM-based
agents: the SpecCompiler, which systematically synthesizes
C code from the specification using techniques liketwo-phase
generation(logic first, then concurrency); the SpecValida-
tor, which rigorously validates the generated code against
the specification and drives aretry-with-feedbackloop to
autonomously correct LLM errors; and then SpecAssistant
which eases the development of specification.
Third, we introduce a mechanism forprincipled evolu-
tion via spec patches. Instead of manually modifying C
implementation, developers add features by authoring a spe-
cial patch, calledspec patch, to the high-level specification.
The SYSSPECtoolchain then automatically propagates this
change, regenerating the implementation to ensure the new
feature is correctly and consistently integrated.
Overall, the new paradigm with SYSSPECshifts the devel-
oper’s burden from low-level implementation to high-level
design. While this demands greater upfront design effort, akin
to the safety discipline of Rust [13, 27], the return is a file
system that is far easier to maintain and evolve.
We utilize SYSSPECto implement SPECFS, a complete
FUSE-based (generative) file system specified entirely in spec-
ification. Our toolchain automatically generates a functional
C-language implementation without any manual intervention.
We validate its correctness and expressiveness by success-
fully generating implementations of a previously verified file
system, AtomFS [55]. Besides, we showcase its capabil-
ity for complex feature integration by seamlessly evolving
292    24th USENIX Conference on File and Storage Technologies USENIX Association
--- page 4 ---
SPECFS with spec patches to support 10 novel features from
Ext4, including delayed allocation and file encryption. We
also highlight its benefits on performance: by applying Ext4-
style delayed allocation method with a concise spec patch,
SYSSPECautomatically regenerated the relevant modules,
resulting in a 99.9% data write reduction for xv6 compilation.
To our knowledge, SYSSPECis the first framework that
enables both the generation and principled evolution of end-
to-end file systems like SPECFS, shifting the developer’s
focus from writing brittle low-level code to crafting robust,
high-level designs. SYSSPECand SPECFS is available at:
https://llmnativeos.github.io/specfs/.
2 Characterizing the Evolution of File Systems
File systems usually require a continuous evolution to adapt to
new hardware features and emerging use cases. This constant
adaptation includes adding new features, resolving bugs, and
optimizing for critical scenarios. Understanding the intricate
process of file system evolution offers valuable insights for
future design. Prior work by L. Lu et al. [35] in 2013 provided
the first analysis of the Linux file system’s evolution. We
continue the analysis with an extended study of evolution
over a 20-year period (from 2005 to 2025), and identify new
implications that highlight the need to re-evaluate current
file system paradigms, particularly in the context of the new
opportunities provided by large language models.
2.1 The Anatomy of File System Change
Methodology.We choose Ext4 as our target because it is a
mature and (still) widely-deployed file system with 20 years
of evolution in real-world environments. Ext4 was intro-
duced in Linux 2.6.19 and has been continuously developed,
incorporating thousands of patches related to performance,
new features, and maintenance. Our analysis is based on all
3,157 Ext4-related commits (i.e., individual patches rather
than patch sets) merged into the mainline Linux from version
2.6.19 to 6.15. To understand the evolution, we categorize
each commit using a classification scheme for FS patches
adapted from prior work [36]: (1) Bug: fixing an existing bug,
(2) Performance: improving efficiency through new designs
or optimizations, (3) Reliability: enhancing the file system’s
robustness, (4) Feature: implementing new functionalities,
and (5) Maintenance: refactoring code or improving docu-
mentation without changing semantic behavior.
Implication-1: File systems consistently evolve.Our analy-
sis of Ext4 patches across Linux versions, as shown in Fig.1,
reveals a clear evolutionary trend. Initially, during the early
stages (Linux 2.6.19–3.4), the high number of changes re-
flects extensive work on new features, bug fixes, and mainte-
nance. The number of changes then decreases significantly
from Linux 3.4 to 4.18 as the codebase matures. However,
a surprising trend emerges: changes increase steadily after
Linux 4.19, peaking at Linux 5.10 — more than a decade
62.1% 15.4%
15.1%
7.4%
(a)
Semantic
Memory
Concurrency
Error Handling
1 2 3 4-5 >5
# Files Changed
0
1000
2000# Commits
2198
388 261 171 139
(b)
Figure 2:(a) Distribution of bug type. (b) Distribution of changed
files per commit.
1 5 10 100 1000 10000
Lines of Code
0
50
100
Percentage (%)
(Normalized)
Performance
Feature
Bug
Maintenance
Reliability
Figure 3:Patch LOC size CDF.
after Ext4’s introduction. We also observe occasional peaks
in the number of changes even during the stable period (Linux
2.6.19–3.4), such as over 50 changes in Linux 3.10 and over
100 in Linux 3.16. This result suggests that a long-lived file
system like Ext4 is ina state of constant evolution.
Implication-2: Bug fixes and maintenance dominate a file
system’s lifetime.While users are often drawn to a file sys-
tem by its key features, e.g., Ext4’s use of extents, our analysis
reveals that non-feature patches dominate the file system’s
lifetime. Specifically, 82.4% of all commits focus on bug
fixes and maintenance. Fig.2-a further shows the distribution
of bug type, indicating that most bugs are semantic bugs. This
finding presents an insight: although new features initially at-
tract users, the long-term success and widespread adoption of
a FS depend heavily on its continuous maintenance. However,
this high volume of maintenance work represents a signifi-
cant and ongoing burden, and current paradigms lack efficient
solutions to handle it.
Implication-3: Feature-related changes are non-trivial.
While feature-related commits constitute only 5.1% of the
total changes, their impact is significant. Our analysis of the
code base, as shown in Fig. 1, reveals that these commits
account for 18.4% of the total lines of code (LOC) changed.
Furthermore, we observe that the introduction of a new feature
often acts as a catalyst for subsequent bug fixes and mainte-
nance work. A new feature introduces a new code base, which
in turn necessitates follow-up commits to fix newly introduced
bugs and maintain the code’s integrity. Consequently, despite
their low commit count, feature-related changes are central to
the overall evolution of a file system.
Implication-4: Evolution is taken in small steps.We mea-
sured the LOC for each patch and present the cumulative
distribution function (CDF) in Fig.3. Our analysis shows that
evolution proceeds through small, frequent changes. Specifi-
cally, about 80% of all bug fixes involve fewer than 20 LOC.
While feature-related patches are generally larger, about 60%
of them still require fewer than 100 LOC. Moreover, the vast
USENIX Association 24th USENIX Conference on File and Storage Technologies    293
--- page 5 ---
// 1. Internal logical error.
-- if(unlikely(error))
++ if(unlikely(error)) {
++ext4_fc_stop_update(inode);
returnerror;
++}
// 2. Cross-module collision.
--#define EXT4_MOUNT2_DAX_INODE 0x000010
#define EXT4_MOUNT2_JOURNAL_FAST_COMMIT
0x000010,→
++#define EXT4_MOUNT2_DAX_INODE 0x000040
Figure 4:Two Example Patches infast-commit.
majority of commits also modify only a single file, as shown
in Fig.2-b. These findings suggest that file system evolution
is composed of these manageable, small-scale changes.
2.2 Case Study: Evolution of Fast Commit
We present a case study to illustrate how different types of
patches are intertwined during the evolution. We usefast
commit[41], a hybrid journaling feature designed to optimize
fsync()-intensive workloads, as an example. Fast commit
reduces I/O overhead and latency by using lightweight, logical
commits, while periodically issuing full commits to maintain
consistency. It is one of the largest features introduced in
Linux 5.10, comprising over 4,000 SLOC.
Phase-1: Feature development.Our analysis covers 98 fast-
commit-related patches from Linux kernel 5.10 to 6.15. The
initial implementation is concentrated in version 5.10, which
includes 9 of the 10 feature-related commits. These initial
patches collectively introduce jbd2 APIs for fast-commit sup-
port, initialization and recovery paths, and the main commit
logic. In total, these commits add over 4,000 lines of code
spanning multiple core modules (e.g., inode, file, journal).
Despite affecting several modules, the modifications are care-
fully localized to minimize interference. This modular design
preserves the existing journaling mechanism and on-disk for-
mat while integrating the new fast-commit logic.
Phase-2: Bug fixes and stabilization.Development efforts
shift to stabilization after the initial release. Of the 55 bug-fix
commits we have identified, over 65% address semantic er-
rors, e.g., misordered updates and incorrect handling of corner
cases. This high proportion of semantic bugs can be attributed
to the feature’s complexity and its deep integration with other
Ext4 components. We classify these bugs as eitherinternal
(within the fast-commit logic) orcross-module(from inter-
actions with other parts of Ext4). Fig.4 shows two examples.
The first illustrates an internal bug where an early return path
omitted necessary cleanup operations, leading to lost meta-
data updates. The second shows a cross-module bug where
newly defined flags conflicted with existing journal checksum
bits, requiring a redefinition of mount macros to resolve the
collision. These examples highlight the inherent difficulty of
integrating features that span multiple modules, underscoring
the need for careful reasoning about global system invariants.
Phase-3: Code maintenance.Alongside bug fixes, 24 main-
tenance commits (totaling 1,080 lines) are applied to refac-
Table 1:Prior code generation methods.“ 0 to N” denotes generat-
ing code from scratch, while “N to N+1 ” refers to generating code
based on existing code, representing two categories of current work.
Type Prior works Precise Modular ConcurrentSpecification
0 to
N
Copilot [2] ✗ ✓ ✗ Natural Language
Clover [46] ✓ ✗ ✗ Docstring + Annotation
Qimeng [20] ✓ ✗ ✗ Programming Language
Nto
N+1
AutoCodeRover [54] ✗ ✓ ✗ Github Issue
CodeAgent [53] ✗ ✓ ✗ Natural Language
“Intention” [24] Half✗ ✗ Natural Language
SPECFS ✓ ✓ ✓ SYSSPEC+ Toolchain
tor and document the fast-commit implementation. Ex-
amples include: (1)Refactoring for readability, where
logic for updating statistics is extracted into a dedicated
function, ext4_fc_update_stats(), to simplify the main
ext4_fc_commit() pathway. (2)API clarification, which
involves enhancing flag descriptions in both the source code
and documentation to prevent misconfiguration.
The lifecycle of the fast-commit feature exemplifies a core
challenge in the evolution of file systems: the initial integra-
tion of a feature is usually followed by a long tail of numerous,
fine-grained fixes and refactoring efforts that are crucial for
stability and long-term maintainability.
2.3 A New Paradigm: Generative File System
The previous analysis reveals that FS development involves
not only the inherent complexity of feature development but
also the long tail of maintenance and bug fixes. This entire
process is laborious and error-prone when performed man-
ually in low-level C code. Luckily, the recent advances in
Large Language Models (LLMs) offer an opportunity to ad-
dress this challenge. LLMs’ proficiency in code generation,
refactoring, and reasoning is well-suited for the high volume
of maintenance and bug-fix tasks that consume the majority
of developer effort. Furthermore, the scope of code when
evolving a file system could typically fit within the context
windows of modern LLMs (Implication IV , §2.1), making an
automated approach technically feasible.
To this end, we propose the new paradigm ofgenerative
file system, i.e., leveraging LLMs to generate and evolve a
file system. The central thesis of our work is that:the path
forward is not to replace developers with LLMs, but to elevate
their role by changing how they express design.
Limitations of prior works.Although abundant prior works
achieve automatic code generation, their inherent limitations
prevent us from leveraging them to achieve the paradigm for
complex file systems, as generalized in Tab.1. These works
can be broadly categorized into two types. First, some works
focus on generating complete code logic from scratch (“from
0 to N”). However, this category of work struggles to cope
with the complexity of file systems, whose modules exhibit
intricate interactions and dependencies. Consequently, such
approaches either produce only simple code (e.g., frontend
pages) or are limited to specific single-module tasks [20, 46],
294    24th USENIX Conference on File and Storage Technologies USENIX Association
--- page 6 ---
SysSpec 
SpecFS 
Functionality 
Speciﬁcation 
Modularity 
Speciﬁcation 
Concurrency 
Speciﬁcation 
Module-1 
Module-3 
Module-2 
Module-4 
read : pre :=.., post :=.., 
         invariants =.. 
Rely : module-2/3 
Guarantee : read 
Con : pre :=cur is 
locked, post :=.., no 
double release 
Implement SpecFS following the design in SysSpec 
(a) Design Cycle (b) Runtime Workflow 
SpecFS 
Module-1 
Module-3 
Module-2 
Module-4 
ImpFS 
ImpMod-1 
ImpMod-3 
ImpMod-2 
ImpMod-4 
Validation agent 
Runtime Deployment 
LLM-based Toolchains 
(Agents) 
Generation Evolution 
(c) Evolution with Spec Patch 
SpecFS 
Mod-1 Mod-3 Mod-2 Mod-4 
Spec patch 
Update Mod-1 
with change-1 
Update Mod-2 
with change-2 
Update Mod-3 
with change-3 
Update Mod-1 
with change-4 
Fail & 
Retry with 
feedbacks 
Key components of SysSpec framework 
SpecFS file system 
ImpFS’ (with new feature in the patch) 
+
Generation 
Figure 5:Design overview.(a) Developers write a file system (SPECFS) using a structured specification language that defines functionality,
modularity, and concurrency. (b) An LLM-based toolchain generates a low-level implementation (ImpFS) from the specification and uses a
validation agent to ensure correctness. (c) The file system evolves by applying a high-levelspec patchto SPECFS, after which the toolchain
regenerates the implementation to include the new features or fixes.
such as generating tensor program implementations for differ-
ent hardware [20], generating unit tests [14,43], mathematical
library functions [12], or performing bit-vector synthesis [19].
Second, other approaches usually focus on evolution,
i.e., modifying existing code (“from N to N+1 ”). They
may utilize methods like Retrieval-Augmented Generation
(RAG) [24, 49] or Agents [2, 3, 24, 25, 53, 54] to enhance gen-
eral code generation capabilities. However, these methods
largely rely on natural language descriptions (e.g., document
strings, GitHub issues [54] or code review comments [24])
for the desired program logic. Even though some methods
attempt to enhance the LLM’s capability to understand in-
tents expressed in natural language [24], ambiguity remains
unavoidable: one cannot simply instruct an LLM to “avoid
race conditions” and expect a correct outcome. Furthermore,
these methods often include all project-related code in the
context, requiring the Agent to autonomously decide how to
retrieve information from this context. Such a burden is un-
controllable, and an excessively long context can potentially
degrade the quality of code generation.
Insight and challenges.Our key insight is that we could
guide the LLM using principles derived from formal methods,
rather than imprecise natural language prompting. Such a
formally structured specification is expected to address the
challenges outlined in §1 simultaneously. First, a semantic
gap arises when specifying module logic, necessitating resolu-
tion of (i) semantic ambiguities, (ii) deep domain knowledge
awareness, and (iii) thread-safe requirements. Second, com-
plex component composition demands careful consideration
of inter-module dependencies and mitigation of cascading
effects induced by each evolutionary patch across other mod-
ules. Third, the inherent unreliability of LLM capabilities
poses a critical barrier to robust system generation.
3 Design Overview
This paper presents SYSSPEC, an end-to-end framework
for developing specification-based generative file systems.
SYSSPECcarefully applies principles from formal methods
to create structured, high-level specifications. While not
strictly formal, these specifications provide a sufficiently pre-
cise blueprint to effectively guide LLMs in generating and
evolving complex FS implementations.
The SYSSPECspecification.At the core of our framework is
a multi-part specification that captures a developer’s design
intent, as shown in Fig. 5-a. It consists of: (1)Function-
ality specifications, which use concepts like Hoare logic
(pre/post-conditions) and invariants to describe the behavior
of individual modules. (2)Modularity specifications, which
decompose the system into distinct components and use a rely-
guarantee discipline [21] to ensure they can be composed
correctly and developed independently. (3)Concurrency
specifications, which explicitly define locking protocols and
other concurrency-related behaviors that are notoriously diffi-
cult for LLMs to infer on their own.
SYSSPECshifts the developer’s role from writing low-
level C code to authoring a high-level design. This paradigm
usually demands a greater upfront investment in design, much
like the safety guarantees in Rust require more care than
traditional C programming. However, the payoff is significant:
once specified, the file system is more robust, easier to evolve,
and better suited for diverse scenarios because the developer
is forced to reason about the design concretely.
Besides, SYSSPECstreamlines evolution usingspec
patches, as shown in Fig.5-c. Instead of manually modifying
thousands of lines of C code to add a feature, a developer
writes a patch containing either new specifications or modifi-
cations to an old one. Our toolchain then applies this patch
and regenerates the low-level implementation, ensuring the
USENIX Association 24th USENIX Conference on File and Storage Technologies    295
--- page 7 ---
change is propagated correctly throughout the system.
The SYSSPECtoolchain.SYSSPECprovides an LLM-based
toolchain that translates the high-level specification into an
executable implementation. As illustrated in Fig. 5-b, this
toolchain includes agents: TheSpecCompileragent trans-
lates the specification (SPECFS) into a low-level C-language
implementation (ImpFS). To manage the current limitations of
LLMs, it uses techniques like two-phase prompting to handle
complex logic. TheSpecValidatoragent ensures the correct-
ness of the generated code, employing a retry-with-feedback
loop to automatically identify and correct errors. With the
designs of SYSSPEC, our evaluation shows significant correct-
ness improvements for complex operations compared to naive
prompting (up to 34.4%). We also provideSpecAssistantto
ease the development of specification.
Case study: SPECFS.With SYSSPEC, we design and im-
plement SPECFS, a complete file system written entirely
in the SYSSPECspecification language. Our toolchain can
automatically generate a functional C-language implemen-
tation of SPECFS without human intervention. Through a
series of case studies, we demonstrate that SPECFS can seam-
lessly evolve via spec patches to support sophisticated features
found in Ext4, e.g., extents or delayed allocation.
4 SYSSPECFramework
4.1 Functionality Specification
The functionality specification defines the behavior of a mod-
ule by describing its state transitions. A module is a collection
of related state variables and functions. The specification is
built upon three components, inspired by formal methods.
First,pre- and post-conditions, following Hoare Logic,
define the contractual obligations for each function by speci-
fying the required state before execution and the guaranteed
state upon completion. Second,invariantsare properties
that must hold true across all state transitions, ensuring the
module’s integrity. Such Hoare-logic-based specification ap-
proach inherently avoids the need for explicitly constructing
the entire state space, thereby directly circumventing the prob-
lem of state space explosion. Finally, asystem algorithm
outlines the high-level logic for how a function should achieve
its state transition, guiding the LLM’s implementation strat-
egy. Rather than always providing a complete system algo-
rithm, our experience shows that a high-levelintentis often
sufficient. The intent can be regarded as a lightweight sys-
tem algorithm that, expressed in natural language, guides the
LLM in generating the desired implementation.
Not all of these components are required for every mod-
ule. We find that the necessary level of detail scales with
complexity. For straightforward modules (Level 1), pre/post-
conditions and (sometimes) invariants are often sufficient.
As the logic becomes more intricate (Level 2), adding an
intent description is recommended to clarify the design. For
1/* Hoare-style Specification */
2Pre-condition:
3path: a NULL-terminated string array
4name: a valid string
5Post-condition:
6Case 1Successful traversal and insertion
7- New inode created
8- Entry inserted into target directory
9- Return 0
10Case 2Traversal or insertion failure
11Return -1
12Invariant: root_inum always exists
Figure 6: Simplified functionality specificaiton foratomfs_ins
the most complex cases involving highly optimized designs
(Level 3), providing an explicit algorithmic description be-
comes essential, as it is unreasonable to expect an LLM to
derive such logic from scratch.
Hoare logic for file system synthesis.To specify function
behavior, we adapt the classic Hoare logic formalism of
{P}C{Q} using pre- and post-conditions, but we sidestep
the high complexity of full formal verification. Each function
is annotated withpre-conditionsthat define required system
states andpost-conditionsthat guarantee specific state transi-
tions and return values. Fig.6 shows atomfs_ins, an internal
function of AtomFS [55] that implements mknod/mkdir. The
pre-condition describes the validness of the parameters. The
post-condition describes the state after the operation.
Our approach diverges from traditional formal methods in
two key aspects. First, an LLM enforces adherence to this
logic during code generation, replacing the role of a formal
theorem prover. Second, to balance the comprehensibility
and unambiguity of the specification, our specifications are
expressed in structured natural language augmented with type
annotations rather than pure mathematical logic, thereby mak-
ing them more accessible. SYSSPECaugments the semantic
precision of natural language with a structured organization
for the specifications (e.g., sections for functionality, modu-
larity, and concurrency), and uses mathematically disciplined
natural-language expressions to ensure that the intended se-
mantics remain precise and unambiguous while keeping the
specification accessible. For example, the specification states
thatthe file size equals max(old_size,offset+len) , rather than
thatthe write updates the file size if necessary. These designs
significantly limit the potential for misinterpretation.
Invariant-guided specification.In addition to per-function
contracts, developers specify system-wideinvariantsthat
describe properties valid across all states during execution.
For example, an invariant may state that:
[ Invariant ] any modification of an inode must
occurwhileholding the corresponding lock
Such invariants define constraints that functions must respect
throughout their execution, and cannot be fully expressed us-
ing only local pre- and post-conditions. For another example,
the root existence invariant in Fig.6 allows the generated code
to safely omit null checks when accessing the root.
System algorithm.While pre- and post-conditions define
296    24th USENIX Conference on File and Storage Technologies USENIX Association
--- page 8 ---
what a function must accomplish, they do not specify how.
Our experience shows this is insufficient for performance-
critical systems, as an LLM might generate an implemen-
tation that satisfies the specification but is highly inefficient.
E.g., given a specification for asort() function, an LLM could
correctly generate a bubble sort ( O(n2)) just as easily as a
quicksort (O(nlogn) ). To address this, thesystem algorithm
component allows developers to explicitly outline the method
for achieving a state transition. This provides crucial guid-
ance, ensuring the LLM implements a performant algorithm,
such as using lock coupling for fine-grained concurrency in-
stead of a coarse-grained global lock.
For example, in the functionality specification of
atomfs_rename, we define the algorithm in three phases:
(1) traversing the common path, (2) traversing the remaining
path and (3) checks and operations. We explicitly specify
the fine-grained locking scheme used in these phrases, which
enables the correct generation of atomfs_rename, a function
that is both highly complex and prone to deadlock.
Intent.LLMs are trained on vast codebases and can often
produce highly optimized code when given the right high-
level guidance, even without a complete system algorithm.
Theintentcomponent in SYSSPECis designed to provide
such guidance. First, it describes the high-level goal of a
function in natural language, e.g., “successful traversal and
insertion” in Fig.6 indicates that the target directory is identi-
fied through file-tree traversal. Second, it allows developers
to inject domain-specific knowledge to steer the LLM toward
better implementation choices, complementing the correct-
ness guarantees provided by the Hoare logic and invariants.
E.g., when reading a large file extent, a developer can use
the intent to suggest a single, bulk I/O operation. Without
this hint, an LLM might generate a correct but inefficient
implementation that reads each disk block individually.
4.2 Modularity Specification
SYSSPECaddresses the composition challenge, avoiding
interface-level dependency errors through a methodology that
combines interface contracts with LLM context management.
Context-bounded modular synthesis.One of the core inno-
vations in SYSSPEC’s modularity specification lies in aligning
module design with two intrinsic properties of LLM reasoning.
First, strict size constraints ensure each module fits entirely
within the model’s context window, enabling holistic analysis
during generation. The specific constraints on module sizes
evolve in tandem with improvements in LLM capabilities and
context window capacities. Take our case study (§5) as an
example, we limited module sizes to ≤500 LoC, which keeps
the token consumption for inference generally within approx-
imately 30K tokens. Second, explicit interface contracts
govern inter-module dependencies throughRely-Guarantee
conditions, a formal mechanism adapted from concurrent pro-
gram verification [55]. This methodology embodies three
critical principles: (1) module implementations must respect
1[RELY]
2Predefined Structures/Functions:
3structinode { ... };
4structinode* root_inum;
5voidlock(structinode*)
6voidunlock(structinode*)
7structinode* locate(structinode* cur,char*
path[])// Traverse path under cur,→
8voidinsert(structinode*,structinode*,char*)
// ...,→
9intcheck_ins(structinode*,char*)// ...
10
11[GUARANTEE]
12Exported Interface:
13intatomfs_ins(char*[],char*,int,
14unsigned,unsigned)
Figure 7:Rely-Guarantee specifications for atomfs_ins.Both
rely and guarantee conditions are simplified for clarity.
their declared dependencies (Rely), (2) provide guarantees
about their behavior (Guarantee), and (3) compose through
logical implication of these contracts.
A critical adaptation occurs in re-imagining rely-guarantee
reasoning, originally developed for concurrent thread veri-
fication, for modular system synthesis. Where traditional
relyconditions specify permissible environment interference
for threads, SYSSPEC’sRelyclauses enumerate a module’s
assumptions about other components. Similarly,Guarantee
clauses replace thread behavior specifications with module
interface contracts. Each module’s Rely conditions must be
entailed by the Guarantees of its dependencies, enabling com-
positional correctness through localized synthesis.
In Fig.7, the module’s Rely clause imports critical elements
from its dependent modules, e.g., the definition of structures,
lock/unlock primitives, path traversal function. The generated
code then exports its own Guarantee, allowing dependents
to build upon its functionality without needing to understand
internal implementation details.
Incorporation with external code.SYSSPECalso supports
incorporating external code (e.g., libraries) via the Rely-
Guarantee framework. External code can be integrated by first
exposing theirGuarantees. Developers then specify depen-
dencies on these exposed guarantees within theRelyclause
of their specifications. During code generation, the external
code is treated as a satisfied dependency, enabling the gener-
ated module to correctly invoke external functions without
reimplementing them.
4.3 Concurrency Specification
Concurrency poses one of the most significant challenges in
FS implementation. A naive approach within the SYSSPEC
would be to describe concurrent behavior using the existing
functionality specification, defining lock states as pre- and
post-conditions and outlining the logic in the algorithmic de-
scription. While plausible in theory, our experience reveals
that LLMs struggle to correctly synthesize complex concur-
rent logic from such unified specifications alone. E.g., when
tasked with implementing the notoriously complex rename,
state-of-the-art LLMs consistently failed to generate a correct
USENIX Association 24th USENIX Conference on File and Storage Technologies    297
--- page 9 ---
1[Rely]
2[Locking Specifications of locate]
3Pre-condition: cur is locked.
4Post-condition: suppose return target.
5- if target is NULL, no lock owned.
6- if target is not NULL, only target is owned.
7[Locking Specifications of check_ins]
8Pre-condition:cur is locked.
9Post-condition:
10- if check_ins returns 0, cur is locked.
11- if check_ins returns 1, no lock is owned.
12
13[Locking Specifications of atomfs_ins]
14Pre-condition:no lock is owned.
15Post-condition:no lock is owned.
Figure 8:Concurrency specifications foratomfs_ins.
1intatomfs_ins(char* path[],char* name, ...) {
2lock(root_inum);
3structinode* target = locate(root_inum, path);
4if(!target)return-1;
5if(check_ins(target, name) != 0)return-1;
6structinode* new_inode = malloc_inode(...);
7insert(target, new_inode, name);
8unlock(target);
9return0;
10}
Figure 9:LLM-generatedatomfs_inswith SYSSPEC.
implementation that satisfied the specification.
Our key insight is to decouple concurrent logic from the
functional logic. We separate the concurrency design (e.g.,
locking) into a standaloneconcurrency specification. This
specification is a specialized version of the functionality spec-
ification, focusing solely on concurrent behavior.
During code generation, our toolchain first directs the LLM
to generate a correctsequentialversion of the code, focusing
only on the primary functionality. Once this sequential imple-
mentation is validated, the toolchain performs a second pass,
using the dedicated concurrency specification to instrument
the code with the required locking and other concurrent be-
haviors. This separation of concerns makes the synthesis task
tractable for current LLMs, allowing them to correctly handle
two distinct, complex problems one at a time.
Fig.8 shows an example of the concurrency specification.
The implementation of atomfs_ins relies on locate and
check_ins. In its concurrency specification, theRelyclauses
capture the locking requirements of these internal functions.
Specifically, since locate requires the cur lock as a precon-
dition, while atomfs_ins itself has no such precondition,
the generated code must first acquire the lock on root_inum
before invoking locate(root_inum, path) . This implies
that when implementing a module with SYSSPEC, the LLMs
considered not only the functional dependencies between
modules but also their locking dependencies.
Putting it together.Fig. 9 shows an example of generated
atomfs_ins. The code fulfils the functionalities defined by
the pre- and post-conditions, correctly invokes functions from
other modules in accordance with the modularity specifica-
tion, and handles lock acquisitions/releases properly as speci-
fied by the concurrency specification.
4.4 DAG-Structured Specification Patch
We introduce a DAG (Directed Acyclic Graph) structured
specification patch, a mechanism that simplifies the evolution
of spec-based file systems. This approach provides aself-
containeddescription of a new feature, explicitly organizes
the dependency changes, and defines a clear and consistent
workflow for applying the evolution.
The leaf node: a self-contained change.The evolution pro-
cess begins at aleaf nodeof the DAG, which has no depen-
dencies on other patch nodes. The specification in a leaf node
represents a localized, self-contained change, typically within
a single module. It introduces new logic and provides new
guarantees without affecting any other part of the existing
system. A leaf node can also define new data structures or
functions that subsequent nodes in the patch willrelyon.
Intermediate nodes: building on guarantees.An interme-
diate node represents a step in the evolution that builds upon
previously introduced changes. Its specification relies on the
new guarantees provided by its child nodes to implement
more complex logic. In turn, this node provides its own,
higher-level guarantees, forming a clear dependency chain
that progressively constructs the new feature. In principle,
any modification to a guarantee necessitates corresponding
specification adjustments for all modules that depend on it,
i.e., these modules are included in the patch as intermediate
nodes to preclude potential compatibility issues.
The root node: the integration point.The root node is the
culmination of the evolution, acting as the final integration
point. Unlike the “tree” structure, a “DAG” structured patch
may have multiple root nodes. Root nodes are characterized
by the property that their specification provides semantically
unchanged guarantees. This equivalence is critical, as it al-
lows the entire chain of new functionality, built up through
the DAG, to safely and transparently replace an old imple-
mentation. This substitution serves as the“commit point”,
where the evolution is atomically applied to the base system.
Evolution involving existing modules.Nodes within a DAG-
structured specification patch includes both new modules and
modifications to existing ones. A modified existing module is
treated as a “new module,” which can largely reuse the exist-
ing specification. If a shared component (e.g., inode) is mod-
ified, all dependent modules must be regenerated to “rely” on
the updated version, while other parts of their specifications
may not require any modifications. These modified modules
then replace the original ones after the patch is merged.
The evolution process.The unidirectional dependencies be-
tween nodes naturally form a DAG, which dictates the evo-
lution workflow. The process begins with the SYSSPEC
toolchain (§4.5) generating code for the leaf nodes. It then
traverses the graph upwards, synthesizing the implementation
for each parent node by leveraging the freshly generated guar-
antees from its children. This continues until the toolchain
reaches the root node, at which point the new feature is fully
298    24th USENIX Conference on File and Storage Technologies USENIX Association
--- page 10 ---
implemented and integrated into the file system.
4.5 The SYSSPECToolchain
We have designed and implemented three LLM-based agents,
SpecCompiler, SpecValidator, and SpecAssistant, that form
the core toolchain for the SYSSPECto serve the entire life-
cycle of generative file system development, The toolchain
further effectively mitigates hallucinations in LLMs by ad-
dressing two key aspects: (1) it helps that LLMs produce
outputs aligned with those specifications through the coordi-
nation of SpecCompiler and SpecValidator, and (2) it helps
developers in producing correct specifications by leveraging a
strictly structured specification format and the SpecAssistant.
The SpecCompiler agent.The SpecCompiler agent is respon-
sible for translating the high-level, specification-based file
system into a low-level C-language implementation (ImpFS)
that can be compiled and deployed. Analogous to a traditional
compiler, it processes the source specification and outputs
machine-usable code. Thanks to our modular design, the
SpecCompiler can operate on one module at a time, confident
that the strict enforcement of rely-guarantee conditions will
ensure seamless integration into a monolithic whole.
For each module, the SpecCompiler employs two primary
techniques. The first istwo-phase prompting, which lever-
ages our separation of concerns in the specification. The
agent’s first phase generates a correct sequential implementa-
tion of the module, focusing only on its core functionality. In
the second phase, it uses the dedicated concurrency specifi-
cation to instrument this sequential code with the necessary
locking and concurrent behaviors.
The second technique is an iterativeretry-with-feedback
loop used within each phase. This loop involves two distinct
LLM roles: a CodeGen agent generates the implementation,
and a separate, reasoning-focused SpecEval agent reviews
the output against the specification. If the SpecEval agent
identifies a flaw, it does not simply report failure; instead,
it generates specific, actionable feedback (e.g., “The case
where function foo() fails is not handled”). This feedback is
then appended to the original prompt, and the CodeGen agent
retries. This refinement cycle continues until the generated
code satisfies the specification or an attempt-limit is reached.
This dual-agent design is critical for overcoming LLM
hallucination. In our experience, the code-generation LLM
will occasionally produce incorrect implementations, even
with a precise specification. However, the SpecEval agent
effectively detects these flaws. This is because verifying a
solution against a set of rules is a simpler cognitive task than
generating the solution from scratch, and the probability of
two distinct models making complementary errors on the
same logic is exceedingly low.
The SpecValidator agent.The SpecValidator agent performs
the final, holistic verification of the complete ImpFS. It com-
bines specification-based review with traditional testing. First,
it re-uses SpecEval logic from SpecCompiler to check each
fully-generated module against the combined functionality
and concurrency specifications. Second, it integrates with
standard software engineering workflows by running a suite
of unit and regression tests against the final C-language file
system. This process emulates a modern CI/CD pipeline: the
SpecEval component acts as an automated code reviewer
verifying adherence to the design, while the test suite ensures
that no existing functionality has regressed.
The SpecAssistant agent.SpecAssistant streamlines specifi-
cation development through a human-in-the-loop process. A
developer provides a draft specification, which the SpecAssis-
tant first validates and reformats to meet SYSSPEC’s syntax.
The agent then enters an automated refinement loop. It re-
peatedly invokes the SpecCompiler; if the SpecCompiler’s
SpecEval phase identifies a flaw, the SpecAssistant uses a
new SpecFine step to automatically polish the specification
based on the feedback before retrying. This loop concludes
in two ways. On success, the SpecAssistant provides the
developer with the refined specification and the C implemen-
tation for validation. On failure, it returns the last attempted
specification annotated with detailed diagnostics, serving as a
debug log that guides the developer in resolving the issue.
5 SPECFS: A Case for Generative FS
5.1 Prototype Implementation
Overview.To demonstrate the benefits of SYSSPEC, we in-
troduce SPECFS, a concurrent in-memory file system that
runs in userspace via FUSE. The architecture is based on
a prior formally verified file system, AtomFS [55]. How-
ever, rather than porting its C implementation, we under-
take acomplete reimplementationguided by our specification.
Specifically, we implement AtomFS’s high-level design with
SYSSPEC’s specifications, including pre- and post-conditions
(we re-use some conditions from AtomFS’s formal specifi-
cations in Coq), invariants, rely/guarantee contracts, system
algorithm descriptions, and concurrency specification.
SPECFS is organized into 45 distinct modules distributed
across several logical layers, including file operations, in-
ode management, path traversal, and the POSIX interface.
SPECFS supports a wide range of standard POSIX calls, such
as open, read, and rename. To validate its functional correct-
ness, we use the xfstests [17] suite within our SpecValida-
tor. SPECFS demonstrates a level of correctness equivalent
to that of the original AtomFS, failing only 64 out of 754 test
cases, all attributable to unimplemented functionality.
System complexity and comprehensibility.While SPECFS
serves as our prototype, it is a non-trivial file system by any
measure. The generated C implementation comprises approx-
imately 4,300 lines of code. To put this figure into context,
we compared it against the 82 file systems in the Linux 6.1.10
kernel. SPECFS ranks 42nd by line count, surpassing estab-
lished systems like squashfs and nearly matching the size
USENIX Association 24th USENIX Conference on File and Storage Technologies    299
--- page 11 ---
Table 2:Case study of applying Ext4 features to AtomFS.“Propose” and “Launch“ indicate the year an feature proposed and the year it is
merged. “Release“ indicates the Linux version with the feature. "Indirect Block" is an exception in the table, as it originates from ext2/3.
Type Feature Propose Launch Brief Description Release
I
Indirect Block (Ext2/3) / / One-to-one block mapping via multi-level pointers /
Extent 2006 2006 Contiguous block ranges reducing metadata by 50% 2.6.19
Inline Data 2011 2013 Store small files in inode’s unused space 3.8
II
Multi Block Pre-Allocation 2006 2008 Benefit large files by allocating blocks in groups 2.6.25
Delayed Allocation 2006 2008 Deferred block allocation for reducing I/O operations 2.6.27
rbtree for Pre-Allocation 2022 2023 rbtree to organize the pre-allocated block pool 6.4
III
Metadata Checksums 2011 2012 Checksummed filesystem metadata structures 3.5
Encryption 2015 2015 Per-directory encryption with low overhead 4.1
Logging(jbd2) 2006 2006 Journaling support for 64-bit filesystems 2.6.19
IV Timestamps 2006 2006 Nanosecond resolution timestamps in inode structure 2.6.19
of 9pfs. We choose C as the programming language as it
remains the de facto standard and is most widely used for low-
level file system developments. While high-level languages
like Rust may be applicable in the future, they present trade-
offs between the benefits from their inherent features (e.g.,
memory safety) and the increased specification complexity
(e.g., due to Rust’s ownership model). Moreover, we observe
that the generated code of SPECFS is highly comprehensible.
LLMs naturally adhere to standard coding conventions and
generate explaining comments, mirroring the style of human
engineers.
Workflow.SPECFS features a unique runtime translation
workflow, as shown in Fig. 5-b. It begins with our LLM-
based agents generating C code for each module based on
its specification. A background daemon then compiles the
generated code and validates it using the SpecValidator. Once
validated, the compiled components are deployed into the
host OS. To mitigate the latency associated with LLM-based
generation, successfully validated module implementations
are cached for immediate reuse. When the specification is
updated, regeneration is triggered asynchronously, allowing
the file system to remain fully operational while the new
version is prepared in the background.
Experience for developing SPECFS.We gain several ex-
periences during the development of SPECFS. First, while
strict SYSSPECadherence effectively ensures accuracy of
code generation (§6.1), simplified specifications (e.g., sim-
plify Rely/Guarantee) can occasionally still result in logically
correct code. If the objective is to maximize development
efficiency, one might consider making a trade-off between
generation accuracy and the use of simplified specifications.
Second, to debug SPECFS, we initially locate bugs in the
generated C code, consistent with debugging methods for
human-written code. Once a bug is localized, the debugging
process additionally involves validating the high-level design
against the specification. In our experience, most issues in
SPECFS are diagnosed at the specification level.
5.2 Case Study of Evolutions
One benefit of a specification-based generative FS is the en-
hancement of the evolvability. In this section, we evolve the
design of SPECFS with 10 well-known Ext4’s features (Tab.2)
using spec patches1, as a case study. These ten features are
classified into four categories that current SYSSPECcan sup-
port: (I)File structure modification, which modifies the under-
lying data structures within the file system; (II)Design update
for existing operations, which modifies the specific behavior
of existing operations, without altering the intended outcome
of these operations; (III)New functionalities implementation
with new operations; (IV)Hyperparameters or metadata mod-
ification, e.g., changing the FS’s block size from 32-bit to
48-bit. Tab.2 presents the specific type of each feature and a
brief description of its implementation logic.
Example: Extent.This feature transforms the file struc-
ture from individual blocks into extents. Each extent
records a segment of contiguous blocks, facilitating sequen-
tial reads and writes. The modification process (Fig. 10)
begins by defining new data structure for extent and
inode. Then, it updates the low-level file operations in
lowlevel_file (and corresponding initializations) to incor-
porate new extent-based file I/O operations. Subsequently, the
inode_management module is modified to invoke these new
extent operations. Since the new inode_management pro-
vides the same guarantee as the original inode_management,
the new inode_management serves as the root node of the
entire patch and directly replaces the original one, making the
complete set of new operations visible to the entire system.
6 Evaluation
6.1 Evaluations on Accuracy
Methodology.We first study whether SPECFS can accurately
generate code to achieve self-evolution, that is, whether the
1The Appendix supplements the DAG structures of the patches used for
specifying these features.
300    24th USENIX Conference on File and Storage Technologies USENIX Association
--- page 12 ---
lowlevel_file inode 
management
inode
initialization
inode & extent 
structure 
extent
initialization
extent  
operations
Root IdentifierLeaf Node
Intermediate Node
Figure 10:DAG-Structured patch for implementing “Extent”.
For simplicity, a node in the figure may encompass multiple modules
of specifications. “Root Identifier” indicates that this node is the
root (along with its associated logic).
20
40
60
80
100
Gemini-2.5 DS-V3.1 GPT-5 QWen3-32B
Accuracy (%)
Normal Oracle SpecFS
(a) AtomFS.
20
40
60
80
100
Gemini-2.5 DS-V3.1 GPT-5 QWen3-32B
Accuracy (%)
Normal Oracle SpecFS (b) Features.
Figure 11:Accuracy results for implementing AtomFS or new
features.“GPT-5” in the figure denotes GPT-5-minimal.
code generation can accurately conform to the logic described
by the specification and accurately meet the functionality of
the corresponding file system module. Our test cases com-
prise all the modules to implement the complete logic of
AtomFS [55]. Specifically, to evaluate the accuracy, we first
define 45 distinct modules within AtomFS and manually au-
thor their ground-truth implementations. A generated module
is consideredcorrectif it (i) passes all functional tests for
AtomFS and (ii) is deemed logically equivalent to the ground-
truth through manual inspection.
We implement two versions of baselines based on a few-
shot learning approach. The normal version incorporates a
description of the file correspondence logic and the APIs of
the dependency modules; The oracle version not only includes
the dependency module’s APIs but also integrates the ground-
truth code of these modules as part of the prompt. We test gen-
eration accuracy using four LLMs of decreasing capability:
Gemini-2.5-Pro [7], DeepSeek-V3.1 Reasoning [18], GPT-
5-minimal [8], and Qwen3-32B [51], whose performance is
ranked according to the LiveCodeBench leaderboard [9].
Accuracy results.To evaluate accuracy, SPECFS uses the
same specification to generate code for the 45 modules with
the four models, and the accuracy results are presented in
Fig. 11-a. We observe that on more powerful models such
as Gemini-2.5-Pro and DS-V3.1, SPECFS achieves 100%
accuracy, completely generating all functional modules of
SPECFS. In contrast, even when the oracle baseline imple-
mentation possesses all contextual code, the accuracy of code
generation using the most capable Gemini-2.5-Pro is 81.8%.
This demonstrates that SPECFS’s specification design signifi-
cantly enhances code generation accuracy for the file system.
6.2 Evaluations on Generalizability
We further evaluate how SYSSPECcan support the generation
of a wider range of file system logic. To this end, we evaluate
whether SPECFS can accurately generate the ten features de-
tailed in Tab.2. These ten new features encompass a total of
Table 3:Ablation study.The evaluation uses DeepSeek-V3.1 Rea-
soning. “Func”, “Mod”, “Con” means Functionality, Modularity
and Concurrency Specifications respectively.
Modules Func +Mod +Con +SpecValidator
Concurrency-
agnostic
40.00%
(12/40)
100%
(40/40)
100%
(40/40)
100%
(40/40)
Thread-
safe
0%
(0/5)
0%
(0/5)
80%
(4/5)
100%
(5/5)
64 functional modules, and we report their overall accuracy.
As depicted in Fig.11-b, SPECFS consistently exhibits higher
generation accuracy across all evaluated models. This fur-
ther substantiates the effectiveness of SYSSPEC. Noted that,
due to many features being implemented primarily through
modifications to existing specifications, and involving less
complex concurrency logic, the accuracy of implementing fea-
tures is higher than implementing atomfs from scratch, further
reflecting the feasibility of using LLMs for FS evolving.
Generalizability for various locking methods.We evaluate
whether the concurrency specifications of SYSSPECare gen-
eral for various locking methods. To this end, we utilize the
dentry_lookup operation in the VFS layer of Linux, as it
exhibits locking requirements at multiple granularities: a lock
must be acquired for the entire hash list during traversal, while
individual locks are also required for each dentry upon access.
In our concurrency specification, we explicitly designate the
use of two distinct locking mechanisms—lock-free RCU for
the hash list and spinlocks for individual dentries. Our experi-
ments verify that the generated code correctly adheres to the
specified concurrency semantics, successfully producing code
that implements multi-granularity and multi-method locking
logic as intended. See details about the specification and the
generated code of the two phases in the Appendix.
6.3 Ablation Study
We evaluate how SPECFS’s designs effectively improve the
accuracy of code generation. We first divide AtomFS’s 45
modules into 40 concurrency-agnostic modules and 5 thread-
safe modules, and then assess the accuracy for implement-
ing these modules under different design configurations, as
shown in Tab. 3. According to the evaluation, we observe
that although the functionality specification alone is insuffi-
cient for correctly generating complex file system (primarily
due to interface mismatch), when combined with the mod-
ularity specification, it effectively supports the generation
of concurrency-agnostic modules. Nevertheless, that is not
enough to accurately produce thread-safe modules. SPECFS
further addresses this limitation by incorporating a concur-
rency specification and agent-supported self-validation to
achieve correctness and robustness for thread-safe modules.
6.4 Evaluations on Productivity
We further evaluate how SPECFS improves the productivity.
We compare the development costs of manual implementa-
USENIX Association 24th USENIX Conference on File and Storage Technologies    301
--- page 13 ---
Table 4:Productivity improvement.
Development Costs Extent Rename
Manual 4.5h (3.0×) 13h (5.4×)
Ours 1.5h 2.4h
 0
 200
 400
 600
 800
File Inode IA INTF Path Util IB ID Ext PA RBT MC Enc DA TS Log
AtomFS Features
LoC
Spec C Impl
Figure 12:Lines of code comparison between specification and
source code.The results contain six basic logical layers of AtomFS
and ten new features in Tab. 2. The abbreviations are as follows.
IA: Interface Auxiliary; INTF: Interface; Util: Utility; IB: Indirect
Block; ID: Inline Data; Ext: Extent; PA: Pre-Allocation; RBT:
rbtree for Pre-Allocation; MC: Metadata Checksums; Enc: Encryp-
tion; DA: Delayed Allocation; TS: Timestamps; Log: Logging.
tion and specification-driven generation for the following
two patches: (1) Supporting the “extent” feature for origi-
nal AtomFS, which requires updating multiple concurrency-
agnostic modules; and (2) Implementing the “rename” mod-
ule of AtomFS, which involves complex locking logic to
ensure thread-safety. We invite two CS master students and
two PhD students for the evaluation.
As shown in Tab. 4, SPECFS improves the program-
ming productivity of the two implementations by 3.0× and
5.4×. For implementing patches involving multiple mod-
ules, SPECFS’s design of DAG-structured specification patch
allows for faster identification of all modules requiring modi-
fication, without the need for source code analysis. SPECFS’s
concurrency specifications further reduce the complexity of
developing sophisticated thread-safe functions.
Lines-of-code.We conducted a comparative analysis of the
lines of code (LoC) between the specifications and the cor-
responding generated C source code. The specifications of
AtomFS are categorized by logical layers, each of which may
encompass several modules. The specifications of Features
are categorized based on their functional characteristics, each
of which corresponds to the features listed in Tab.2. The re-
sults in Fig.12 show that the specification descriptions consis-
tently require fewer lines than their corresponding generated
C source code. This reduction in LoC implies possibly lower
development effort and improved productivity.
Generation latency.The latency of code generation primarily
depends on the inference performance of the LLM itself. In
our experience, the generation time for SPECFS typically
ranges from several minutes to tens of minutes.
6.5 Performance Optimizations
This section evaluates how the new features implemented by
SPECFS (§5.2, Tab.2) effectively improve the performance.
Inline data.We first evaluate the compression effect of “In-
line Data” on file sizes. As shown in Fig.13-left, using inline
data significantly reduces the file sizes of QEMU [10] and
Linux source code [6], decreasing the required storage capac-
 0
 25
 50
 75
 100
Qemu Linux 8KB
500r/w
16KB
500r/w
5M
500w
20M
1000w
# blocks uncontig% # access times
Inline data Pre-allocation rbtree
Percentage (%)
 0
 50
 100
xv6qemu SF LF xv6qemu SF LF
Extent Delayed Allocation 
0.1% 0.4% 0.4%
488%
Percentage (%)
Metadata Reads
Metadata Writes
Data Reads
Data Writes
Figure 13:Performances improvements with new features imple-
mented by SPECFS.The results were normalized before and after
optimization, and a lower percentage indicates better performance.
Test cases in the right are “xv6 compilation” (“xv6”), “copy qemu”
(“qemu”),“small file” (“SF”), “large file” (“LF”). The “SF” and
“LF” tests involve various read or write operations on multiple small
or large files, respectively representing metadata-intensive and data-
intensive workloads. The data for "Delayed Allocation" that is either
too long or too short is marked in the figure.
ity by 35.4% and 21.0%, respectively.
Multi-block pre-allocation.We evaluate whether the “Multi-
block Pre-allocation” feature, which integrates “Extent” and
proactively allocates contiguous blocks to form a block pool
and subsequently prioritizes drawing blocks from this pool
during block allocation, increases the sequential read/write
ratio of file system operations. Our microbenchmarks first
create a large file and issue random writes to it at fixed page
sizes (e.g., 4KB or 8KB). Then, we repeatedly apply the
following process: a random region within the file is selected,
and sequential read or write operations are issued over this
range. Fig.13-left shows uncontiguous reads and writes ratio
drops ∼30% after applying pre-allocation (we regard a read-
/write operation as sequential if its range falls within a single
extent). This emphasizes that our pre-allocation optimization
enhances the contiguity of data blocks of each file.
Red-black tree for pre-allocation.We evaluate how effec-
tively the transition of the pre-allocation block pool from a
linked list to a red-black tree structure reduces block pool
access frequency. Our micro-benchmark first constructs a
file with a large block pool by employing a series of write
operations exhibiting a specific pattern. Then, we perform
random writes to the file and record the number of accesses
to the block pool. As shown in Fig. 13-left, the red-black
tree demonstrably reduces block pool access frequency, for
example, by 80.7% when performing 1,000 writes on a 20MB
file. The result also indicates that the benefits of the red-black
tree are more pronounced with larger files.
Extent.Fig.13-right shows the proportion of I/O operations
(encompassing both metadata and data reads and writes) af-
ter applying Extent, relative to those before applying Extent.
The result shows that applying Extent effectively reduces the
number of I/O operations, thereby improving the performance
of the file system. It is because an extent data structure rep-
resents a sequence of contiguous data blocks. The read and
write operations on this sequence of data blocks are com-
pleted in a single I/O operation, rather than through multiple
individual block-by-block reads and writes.
Delayed allocation.We evaluate how the number of data
302    24th USENIX Conference on File and Storage Technologies USENIX Association
--- page 14 ---
read and write operations is reduced by “Delayed Allocation”,
which prioritizes read and write within a global buffer, and
flushes the buffer to the disk in a batch when it reaches the
size limits. According to the results shown in Fig.13-right,
the number of write operations is significantly reduced, with
some cases demonstrating an elimination of up to 99.9% of
write operations. Read operations are also reduced in most
cases, while in the cases such as the large file test, the number
of data reads increases. The reason is that, after applying
the feature, data writes no longer directly target the disk;
instead, data is read into a buffer and write operations are
performed within that buffer. This may introduce additional
reads, especially for regular sequential cyclic writes.
6.6 Limitations and Discussion
Missing FS features.Although SPECFS represents a suc-
cessful endeavor in realizing a complex file system using
SYSSPEC, SPECFS is currently implemented as a user-space
file system based on FUSE [5]. Consequently, it does not op-
erate in kernel mode and lacks a storage stack, such as direct
disk access, nor does it consider crash consistency. Our eval-
uation of SPECFS primarily focuses on validating the genera-
tion methodology and ensuring correctness, which precludes
an apple-to-apple comparison with native kernel-space file
systems regarding raw performance metrics such as through-
put.
We plan to apply SPECFS to the self-evolution of industrial
file systems (e.g., EROFS or Ext4 [4, 23]), which is challeng-
ing due to the increased engineering complexity. To address
this, we consider a fully formally verified “AtomFS-Ext4”
unnecessary. Instead, we propose developing a “SPECFS-
Ext4” directly based on documentation, using these mitigation
strategies. First, instead of specifying the whole state of Ext4,
developers can start with a minimal baseline (like Ext2) and in-
crementally add features to it. Second, we plan to enhance the
SpecAssistant to automatically bootstrap draft specifications
from documentation (e.g., kernel wikis) or even Ext4 source
code. Third, we could adapt methodologies of software engi-
neering to guide the development of specification-constructed
(rather than programming-language-constructed) file systems,
e.g., applying methods similar to the Law of Demeter [32] to
reduce the coupling between modules.
Push-button verification integration.Moreover, although
SpecValidator enhances the correctness of generated code to
some extent through software testing and LLM-based val-
idation, a greater potential of SPECFS lies in the fact that
each module is equipped with a ready specification. This
inherently facilitates integration with push-button verification
and similar methodologies, holding the potential to achieve a
generative and formally-verified paradigm.
7 Related Work
We present other related work besides the discussion in §2.3.
Domain-specific code generation.Some efforts in program
synthesis (e.g., SyGus [39]) also focus on automated code
generation. They may leverage Domain-Specific Languages
(DSLs) to precisely articulate code logic, but face the chal-
lenges in scaling to diverse types of scenarios. E.g., MegaL-
ibm [12] introduces a novel DSL to construct specifications
for mathematical library functions. DryadSynth [19] focuses
on bit-vector synthesis building upon the SyGus methodology.
Other research addresses LLM-based code generation for
specific domains outside file systems. QiMeng Xpiler [20]
uses LLMs to construct a transcompiler that adapts low-
level tensor programs for various hardware platforms. Au-
toverus [52] employs LLM-based tools for proving the correct-
ness of Rust code. OSVBench and SpecGen [30, 37] address
generating formal specifications for a given code snippet.
Formal verification methods.Many studies verify com-
plex systems, such as operating systems [28], file sys-
tems [16, 55, 56], or cloud systems [47]. These efforts also
involve formal specifications to ascertain the correctness of
handcrafted implementations, but cannot be used diretly for
generative file systems. We can draw upon these existing
specifications when authoring SYSSPECfor code generation.
LLM-assisted development.A separate stream of research
applies LLMs to mitigate the burden of the file system devel-
opment. For example, W ASABI [44] utilizes LLMs to detect
intricate retry-related problems in large-scale systems. Sys-
GPT [40] employs LLMs to provide developers with context-
aware performance suggestions. However, they cannot effec-
tively evolve a file system like SPECFS.
8 Conclusion
This paper presents SYSSPECand SPECFS, a framework and
a case for generative file systems. Different from traditional
paradigms, SYSSPECshifts the developer’s focus from writ-
ing low-level code to designing high-level specification, and
SPECFS shows the potential benefits on evolvability.
Acknowledgments
We are grateful to our shepherd Mai Zheng for his detailed sug-
gestions, which significantly improved the paper. We thank
the anonymous FAST reviewers for their constructive feed-
back. This work was supported in part by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China (No. 62432010, 62302300 and
62472279), the Fundamental and Interdisciplinary Disciplines
Breakthrough Plan of the Ministry of Education of China
(JYB2025XDXM113), and the Fundamental Research Funds
for the Central Universities. Corresponding authors: Dong Du
(dd_nirvana@sjtu.edu.cn), Yubin Xia (xiayubin@sjtu.
edu.cn), and Haibo Chen (haibochen@sjtu.edu.cn).
USENIX Association 24th USENIX Conference on File and Storage Technologies    303
--- page 15 ---
References
[1] Openai chatgpt application. https://openai.com/
chatgpt/overview/, 2024.
[2] Copilot: Your ai companion. https://copilot.
microsoft.com/, 2025. Referenced May 2025.
[3] Cursor. https://cursor.com/, 2025. Referenced
May 2025.
[4] ext4(5) — linux manual page. https://man7.org/
linux/man-pages/man5/ext4.5.html, 2025.
[5] Fuse. https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/next/
filesystems/fuse.html, 2025.
[6] Github - torvalds/linux: Linux kernel source tree.
https://github.com/torvalds/linux, 2025.
[7] Google gemini 2.5 application. https://gemini.
google.com/app, 2025.
[8] Gpt-5 system card. https://cdn.openai.com/
gpt-5-system-card.pdf, 2025.
[9] Livecodebench benchmark leaderboard. https:
//artificialanalysis.ai/evaluations/
livecodebench, 2025.
[10] Qemu: A generic and open source machine emulator
and virtualizer. https://www.qemu.org/, 2025. Ref-
erenced May 2025.
[11] Jinze Bai, Shuai Bai, Yunfei Chu, Zeyu Cui, Kai Dang,
Xiaodong Deng, Yang Fan, Wenbin Ge, Yu Han, Fei
Huang, et al. Qwen technical report.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2309.16609, 2023.
[12] Ian Briggs, Yash Lad, and Pavel Panchekha. Implemen-
tation and synthesis of math library functions.Proc.
ACM Program. Lang., 8(POPL), January 2024.
[13] William Bugden and Ayman Alahmar. Rust: The pro-
gramming language for safety and performance.arXiv
preprint arXiv:2206.05503, 2022.
[14] Bei Chen, Fengji Zhang, Anh Nguyen, Daoguang Zan,
Zeqi Lin, Jian-Guang Lou, and Weizhu Chen. Codet:
Code generation with generated tests.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2207.10397, 2022.
[15] Haogang Chen, Daniel Ziegler, Tej Chajed, Adam Chli-
pala, M Frans Kaashoek, and Nickolai Zeldovich. Using
crash hoare logic for certifying the fscq file system. In
Proceedings of the 25th Symposium on Operating Sys-
tems Principles, pages 18–37. ACM, 2015.
[16] Haogang Chen, Daniel Ziegler, Tej Chajed, Adam Chli-
pala, M. Frans Kaashoek, and Nickolai Zeldovich. Us-
ing crash hoare logic for certifying the FSCQ file sys-
tem. In2016 USENIX Annual Technical Conference
(USENIX ATC 16), Denver, CO, June 2016. USENIX
Association.
[17] Jonathan Corbet. Toward better testing. https://lwn.
net/Articles/591985/, 2014.
[18] DeepSeek-AI, Aixin Liu, Bei Feng, Bing Xue, Bingx-
uan Wang, Bochao Wu, Chengda Lu, Chenggang Zhao,
Chengqi Deng, Chenyu Zhang, Chong Ruan, Damai
Dai, Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Deli Chen, Dongjie Ji, Er-
hang Li, Fangyun Lin, Fucong Dai, Fuli Luo, Guangbo
Hao, Guanting Chen, Guowei Li, H. Zhang, Han Bao,
Hanwei Xu, Haocheng Wang, Haowei Zhang, Honghui
Ding, Huajian Xin, Huazuo Gao, Hui Li, Hui Qu, J. L.
Cai, Jian Liang, Jianzhong Guo, Jiaqi Ni, Jiashi Li, Ji-
awei Wang, Jin Chen, Jingchang Chen, Jingyang Yuan,
Junjie Qiu, Junlong Li, Junxiao Song, Kai Dong, Kai Hu,
Kaige Gao, Kang Guan, Kexin Huang, Kuai Yu, Lean
Wang, Lecong Zhang, Lei Xu, Leyi Xia, Liang Zhao,
Litong Wang, Liyue Zhang, Meng Li, Miaojun Wang,
Mingchuan Zhang, Minghua Zhang, Minghui Tang,
Mingming Li, Ning Tian, Panpan Huang, Peiyi Wang,
Peng Zhang, Qiancheng Wang, Qihao Zhu, Qinyu Chen,
Qiushi Du, R. J. Chen, R. L. Jin, Ruiqi Ge, Ruisong
Zhang, Ruizhe Pan, Runji Wang, Runxin Xu, Ruoyu
Zhang, Ruyi Chen, S. S. Li, Shanghao Lu, Shangyan
Zhou, Shanhuang Chen, Shaoqing Wu, Shengfeng Ye,
Shengfeng Ye, Shirong Ma, Shiyu Wang, Shuang Zhou,
Shuiping Yu, Shunfeng Zhou, Shuting Pan, T. Wang,
Tao Yun, Tian Pei, Tianyu Sun, W. L. Xiao, Wangding
Zeng, Wanjia Zhao, Wei An, Wen Liu, Wenfeng Liang,
Wenjun Gao, Wenqin Yu, Wentao Zhang, X. Q. Li, Xi-
angyue Jin, Xianzu Wang, Xiao Bi, Xiaodong Liu, Xi-
aohan Wang, Xiaojin Shen, Xiaokang Chen, Xiaokang
Zhang, Xiaosha Chen, Xiaotao Nie, Xiaowen Sun, Xi-
aoxiang Wang, Xin Cheng, Xin Liu, Xin Xie, Xingchao
Liu, Xingkai Yu, Xinnan Song, Xinxia Shan, Xinyi
Zhou, Xinyu Yang, Xinyuan Li, Xuecheng Su, Xuheng
Lin, Y . K. Li, Y . Q. Wang, Y . X. Wei, Y . X. Zhu, Yang
Zhang, Yanhong Xu, Yanhong Xu, Yanping Huang,
Yao Li, Yao Zhao, Yaofeng Sun, Yaohui Li, Yaohui
Wang, Yi Yu, Yi Zheng, Yichao Zhang, Yifan Shi, Yil-
iang Xiong, Ying He, Ying Tang, Yishi Piao, Yisong
Wang, Yixuan Tan, Yiyang Ma, Yiyuan Liu, Yongqiang
Guo, Yu Wu, Yuan Ou, Yuchen Zhu, Yuduan Wang,
Yue Gong, Yuheng Zou, Yujia He, Yukun Zha, Yunfan
Xiong, Yunxian Ma, Yuting Yan, Yuxiang Luo, Yuxi-
ang You, Yuxuan Liu, Yuyang Zhou, Z. F. Wu, Z. Z.
Ren, Zehui Ren, Zhangli Sha, Zhe Fu, Zhean Xu, Zhen
Huang, Zhen Zhang, Zhenda Xie, Zhengyan Zhang,
Zhewen Hao, Zhibin Gou, Zhicheng Ma, Zhigang Yan,
304    24th USENIX Conference on File and Storage Technologies USENIX Association
--- page 16 ---
Zhihong Shao, Zhipeng Xu, Zhiyu Wu, Zhongyu Zhang,
Zhuoshu Li, Zihui Gu, Zijia Zhu, Zijun Liu, Zilin
Li, Ziwei Xie, Ziyang Song, Ziyi Gao, and Zizheng
Pan. Deepseek-v3 technical report.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2412.19437, 2025.
[19] Yuantian Ding and Xiaokang Qiu. Enhanced enumera-
tion techniques for syntax-guided synthesis of bit-vector
manipulations.Proc. ACM Program. Lang., 8(POPL),
January 2024.
[20] Shouyang Dong, Yuanbo Wen, Jun Bi, Di Huang, Ji-
aming Guo, Jianxing Xu, Ruibai Xu, Xinkai Song,
Yifan Hao, Xuehai Zhou, et al. Qimeng-xpiler:
Transcompiling tensor programs for deep learning sys-
tems with a neural-symbolic approach.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2505.02146, 2025.
[21] Xinyu Feng. Local rely-guarantee reasoning. InPro-
ceedings of the 36th Annual ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT
Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages,
POPL ’09, page 315–327, New York, NY , USA, 2009.
Association for Computing Machinery.
[22] Xiang Gao, Mingkai Dong, Xie Miao, Wei Du, Chao Yu,
and Haibo Chen. EROFS: A compression-friendly read-
only file system for resource-scarce devices. In2019
USENIX Annual Technical Conference (USENIX ATC
19), pages 149–162, Renton, W A, July 2019. USENIX
Association.
[23] Xiang Gao, Mingkai Dong, Xie Miao, Wei Du, Chao Yu,
and Haibo Chen. EROFS: A compression-friendly read-
only file system for resource-scarce devices. In2019
USENIX Annual Technical Conference (USENIX ATC
19), pages 149–162, Renton, W A, July 2019. USENIX
Association.
[24] Qi Guo, Xiaofei Xie, Shangqing Liu, Ming Hu, Xiao-
hong Li, and Lei Bu. Intention is all you need: Refining
your code from your intention. InProceedings of the
IEEE/ACM 47th International Conference on Software
Engineering, ICSE ’25, pages 1127–1139. IEEE Press,
2025.
[25] Dong Huang, Jie M. Zhang, Michael Luck, Qingwen
Bu, Yuhao Qing, and Heming Cui. Agentcoder: Multi-
agent-based code generation with iterative testing and
optimisation.arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.13010, 2024.
[26] Lei Huang, Weijiang Yu, Weitao Ma, Weihong Zhong,
Zhangyin Feng, Haotian Wang, Qianglong Chen, Wei-
hua Peng, Xiaocheng Feng, Bing Qin, and Ting Liu. A
survey on hallucination in large language models: Prin-
ciples, taxonomy, challenges, and open questions.ACM
Trans. Inf. Syst., 43(2), January 2025.
[27] Ralf Jung, Jacques-Henri Jourdan, Robbert Krebbers,
and Derek Dreyer. Safe systems programming in rust:
The promise and the challenge, 2021.
[28] Gerwin Klein, Kevin Elphinstone, Gernot Heiser, June
Andronick, David Cock, Philip Derrin, Dhammika Elka-
duwe, Kai Engelhardt, Rafal Kolanski, Michael Norrish,
Thomas Sewell, Harvey Tuch, and Simon Winwood.
sel4: formal verification of an os kernel. InProceedings
of the ACM SIGOPS 22nd Symposium on Operating Sys-
tems Principles, SOSP ’09, pages 207–220, New York,
NY , USA, 2009. Association for Computing Machinery.
[29] Changman Lee, Dongho Sim, Jooyoung Hwang, and
Sangyeun Cho. F2FS: A new file system for flash stor-
age. In13th USENIX Conference on File and Storage
Technologies (FAST 15), pages 273–286, Santa Clara,
CA, February 2015. USENIX Association.
[30] Shangyu Li, Juyong Jiang, Tiancheng Zhao, and Jiasi
Shen. Osvbench: Benchmarking llms on specification
generation tasks for operating system verification.arXiv
preprint arXiv:2504.20964, 2025.
[31] Hongjin Liang, Xinyu Feng, and Ming Fu. A rely-
guarantee-based simulation for verifying concurrent pro-
gram transformations. InProceedings of the 39th an-
nual ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT symposium on Principles
of programming languages, pages 455–468, 2012.
[32] Karl J. Lieberherr and Ian M. Holland. Assuring
good style for object-oriented programs.IEEE Softw.,
6(5):38–48, September 1989.
[33] Aixin Liu, Bei Feng, Bin Wang, Bingxuan Wang,
Bo Liu, Chenggang Zhao, Chengqi Dengr, Chong Ruan,
Damai Dai, Daya Guo, et al. Deepseek-v2: A strong,
economical, and efficient mixture-of-experts language
model.arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.04434, 2024.
[34] Aixin Liu, Bei Feng, Bing Xue, Bingxuan Wang,
Bochao Wu, Chengda Lu, Chenggang Zhao, Chengqi
Deng, Chenyu Zhang, Chong Ruan, et al. Deepseek-
v3 technical report.arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.19437,
2024.
[35] Lanyue Lu, Andrea C. Arpaci-Dusseau, Remzi H.
Arpaci-Dusseau, and Shan Lu. A study of linux file
system evolution. In11th USENIX Conference on File
and Storage Technologies (FAST 13), pages 31–44, San
Jose, CA, February 2013. USENIX Association.
[36] Lanyue Lu, Andrea C. Arpaci-Dusseau, Remzi H.
Arpaci-Dusseau, and Shan Lu. A study of linux file
system evolution.ACM Trans. Storage, 10(1), January
2014.
USENIX Association 24th USENIX Conference on File and Storage Technologies    305
--- page 17 ---
[37] Lezhi Ma, Shangqing Liu, Yi Li, Xiaofei Xie, and Lei
Bu. Specgen: Automated generation of formal program
specifications via large language models.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2401.08807, 2025.
[38] Gian Ntzik, Pedro da Rocha Pinto, Julian Sutherland,
and Philippa Gardner. A Concurrent Specification of
POSIX File Systems. In Todd Millstein, editor,32nd
European Conference on Object-Oriented Programming
(ECOOP 2018), volume 109 ofLeibniz International
Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs), pages 4:1–4:28,
Dagstuhl, Germany, 2018. Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-
Zentrum für Informatik.
[39] Saswat Padhi, Elizabeth Polgreen, Mukund
Raghothaman, Andrew Reynolds, and Abhishek
Udupa. The sygus language standard version 2.1.arXiv
preprint arXiv:2312.06001, 2023.
[40] Sujin Park, Mingyu Guan, Xiang Cheng, and Taesoo
Kim. Principles and methodologies for serial perfor-
mance optimization. In19th USENIX Symposium on
Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI
25), pages 357–373, 2025.
[41] Harshad Shirwadkar, Saurabh Kadekodi, and Theodore
Tso. FastCommit: resource-efficient, performant and
cost-effective file system journaling. In2024 USENIX
Annual Technical Conference (USENIX ATC 24), pages
157–171, Santa Clara, CA, July 2024. USENIX Associ-
ation.
[42] Helgi Sigurbjarnarson, James Bornholt, Emina Torlak,
and Xi Wang. Push-Button verification of file sys-
tems via crash refinement. In12th USENIX Sympo-
sium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation
(OSDI 16), pages 1–16, Savannah, GA, November 2016.
USENIX Association.
[43] Thodoris Sotiropoulos, Stefanos Chaliasos, and Zhen-
dong Su. Api-driven program synthesis for testing static
typing implementations.Proc. ACM Program. Lang.,
8(POPL), January 2024.
[44] Bogdan Alexandru Stoica, Utsav Sethi, Yiming Su,
Cyrus Zhou, Shan Lu, Jonathan Mace, Madanlal Musu-
vathi, and Suman Nath. If at first you don’t succeed,
try, try, again...? insights and llm-informed tooling for
detecting retry bugs in software systems. InProceed-
ings of the ACM SIGOPS 30th Symposium on Operating
Systems Principles, SOSP ’24, pages 63–78, New York,
NY , USA, 2024. Association for Computing Machinery.
[45] Ion Stoica, Matei Zaharia, Joseph Gonzalez, Ken Gold-
berg, Koushik Sen, Hao Zhang, Anastasios Angelopou-
los, Shishir G. Patil, Lingjiao Chen, Wei-Lin Chiang,
and Jared Q. Davis. Specifications: The missing link to
making the development of llm systems an engineering
discipline.arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.05299, 2024.
[46] Chuyue Sun, Ying Sheng, Oded Padon, and Clark Bar-
rett. Clover: Closed-loop verifiable code generation.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.17807, 2024.
[47] Xudong Sun, Wenjie Ma, Jiawei Tyler Gu, Zicheng Ma,
Tej Chajed, Jon Howell, Andrea Lattuada, Oded Padon,
Lalith Suresh, Adriana Szekeres, and Tianyin Xu. Anvil:
Verifying liveness of cluster management controllers. In
18th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design
and Implementation (OSDI 24), pages 649–666, Santa
Clara, CA, July 2024. USENIX Association.
[48] Gemini Team, Petko Georgiev, Ving Ian Lei, Ryan Bur-
nell, Libin Bai, Anmol Gulati, Garrett Tanzer, Damien
Vincent, Zhufeng Pan, Shibo Wang, et al. Gemini 1.5:
Unlocking multimodal understanding across millions
of tokens of context.arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.05530,
2024.
[49] Zora Zhiruo Wang, Akari Asai, Xinyan Velocity Yu,
Frank F. Xu, Yiqing Xie, Graham Neubig, and Daniel
Fried. Coderag-bench: Can retrieval augment code
generation?arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.14497, 2025.
[50] Ziwei Xu, Sanjay Jain, and Mohan Kankanhalli. Hal-
lucination is inevitable: An innate limitation of large
language models.arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.11817,
2025.
[51] An Yang, Anfeng Li, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang,
Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chang Gao, Chen-
gen Huang, Chenxu Lv, Chujie Zheng, Dayiheng Liu,
Fan Zhou, Fei Huang, Feng Hu, Hao Ge, Haoran Wei,
Huan Lin, Jialong Tang, Jian Yang, Jianhong Tu, Jian-
wei Zhang, Jianxin Yang, Jiaxi Yang, Jing Zhou, Jingren
Zhou, Junyang Lin, Kai Dang, Keqin Bao, Kexin Yang,
Le Yu, Lianghao Deng, Mei Li, Mingfeng Xue, Mingze
Li, Pei Zhang, Peng Wang, Qin Zhu, Rui Men, Ruize
Gao, Shixuan Liu, Shuang Luo, Tianhao Li, Tianyi Tang,
Wenbiao Yin, Xingzhang Ren, Xinyu Wang, Xinyu
Zhang, Xuancheng Ren, Yang Fan, Yang Su, Yichang
Zhang, Yinger Zhang, Yu Wan, Yuqiong Liu, Zekun
Wang, Zeyu Cui, Zhenru Zhang, Zhipeng Zhou, and
Zihan Qiu. Qwen3 technical report.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2505.09388, 2025.
[52] Chenyuan Yang, Xuheng Li, Md Rakib Hossain Misu,
Jianan Yao, Weidong Cui, Yeyun Gong, Chris Haw-
blitzel, Shuvendu Lahiri, Jacob R. Lorch, Shuai Lu,
Fan Yang, Ziqiao Zhou, and Shan Lu. Autoverus: Au-
tomated proof generation for rust code.Proc. ACM
Program. Lang., 9(OOPSLA2), October 2025.
306    24th USENIX Conference on File and Storage Technologies USENIX Association
--- page 18 ---
[53] Kechi Zhang, Jia Li, Ge Li, Xianjie Shi, and Zhi
Jin. Codeagent: Enhancing code generation with tool-
integrated agent systems for real-world repo-level cod-
ing challenges.arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.07339, 2024.
[54] Yuntong Zhang, Haifeng Ruan, Zhiyu Fan, and Abhik
Roychoudhury. Autocoderover: Autonomous program
improvement. InProceedings of the 33rd ACM SIG-
SOFT International Symposium on Software Testing and
Analysis, ISSTA 2024, pages 1592–1604, New York,
NY , USA, 2024. Association for Computing Machin-
ery.
[55] Mo Zou, Haoran Ding, Dong Du, Ming Fu, Ronghui Gu,
and Haibo Chen. Using concurrent relational logic with
helpers for verifying the atomfs file system. InProceed-
ings of the 27th ACM Symposium on Operating Systems
Principles, SOSP ’19, pages 259–274, New York, NY ,
USA, 2019. Association for Computing Machinery.
[56] Mo Zou, Dong Du, Mingkai Dong, and Haibo Chen.
Using dynamically layered definite releases for verify-
ing the RefFS file system. In18th USENIX Sympo-
sium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation
(OSDI 24), pages 629–648, Santa Clara, CA, July 2024.
USENIX Association.
USENIX Association 24th USENIX Conference on File and Storage Technologies    307
--- page 19 ---
A Artifact Appendix
Abstract
This artifact contains the source code and scripts required to
reproduce the results presented in the paper. The artifact in-
cludes the SpecFS filesystem generation pipeline using Large
Language Models (LLMs) and end-to-end evaluation work-
flows. It supports reproducing the filesystem generation from
high-level specifications, executing automated accuracy and
performance benchmarks, and regenerating the plots reported
in the paper.
Scope
The artifact allows for the validation of the following main
claims made in the paper:
• Accuracy:The SpecFS filesystem generated by the
framework accurately implements the given specifica-
tions. Validation is confirmed when the generated filesys-
tem passes all functional tests in the pipeline.
• Productivity:The specification descriptions consis-
tently require fewer lines of code than their correspond-
ing generated C source code across evaluated modules,
demonstrating improved developer productivity.
• Performance Optimizations:The artifact validates that
specific optimizations produce measurable performance
improvements. The evaluation results allow for a qualita-
tive comparison against the trends reported in the paper.
Contents
The artifact is organized as follows:
•sysspec/ : Contains the high-level filesystem specifica-
tions and the logic for generating the filesystem imple-
mentation.
•eval/ : Includes evaluation artifacts for comparing base-
lines against optimized versions.
•data/ & tests/: Datasets and scripts used by evalua-
tion workloads and validation tests.
•tools/ & plot/: Utility scripts for the pipeline and
scripts for generating the figures.
•gen.py : The main script to run the generation pipeline
and functional validation.
•eval.py : The main script to execute benchmarks and
reproduce evaluation results.
Hosting
The artifact is hosted on GitHub (branch main): https:
//github.com/LLMNativeOS/specfs-ae. The repository
includes a detailed README.md file explaining the specific
claims and expected results.
Requirements
• Operating System:Linux is required (tested on De-
bian/Ubuntu).
• Hardware/Software:The system must support FUSE
(Filesystem in Userspace). Required packages include
fuse,libfuse-dev,gcc,make, andpython3.
• Python Environment:The project uses uv for depen-
dency management.
• API Access:An API key is required for the LLM back-
end. The artifact supports Google AI (Gemini, recom-
mended) or DeepSeek.
B Case Study:dentry_lookup
We take dentry_lookup function as an representative exam-
ple to illustrate the specification and the code generated from
it.
B.1 Specification
Phase 1: Initial Implementation.Provide a complete C file
that implements the dentry_lookup operation. You can use
information from [RELY], [GUARANTEE], and [SPECIFI-
CATION] as described below. Please output only the resulting
file.
[RELY]
Predefined Structures/Functions
structqstr {
unsigned inthash;
unsigned intlen;
const unsigned char*name;
};
structdentry {
structqstr d_name;
structdentry *d_parent;
structhlist_node d_hash;
atomic_t d_count;
spinlock_t d_lock;
};
structhlist_head {/ * ... */};
structhlist_node {/ * ... */};
structhlist_head* d_hash(structdentry* parent,
unsigned inthash);,→
intmemcmp(const void*s1,const void*s2,
size_tn);,→
intd_unhashed(structdentry* dentry);
#define hlist_entry(ptr, type, member)
container_of(ptr,type,member),→
[GUARANTEE]
API Compliance: The function must have the exact signa-
ture declared below:
308    24th USENIX Conference on File and Storage Technologies USENIX Association
--- page 20 ---
structdentry * dentry_lookup(structdentry *
parent,structqstr * name);,→
[SPECIFICATION]
Precondition:parentandnameare valid pointers.
Postcondition: The function’s behavior depends on whether
a matching dentry is found.
Case 1 (Success) If a child dentry of parent is found with
a name that matches name, and this dentry is currently
active (not unhashed), then:
• The reference count (d_count) of the found dentry
is incremented.
• A pointer to the found dentry is returned.
Case 2 (Failure) If no active child dentry of parent with a
matching name is found, the function returnsNULL.
System Algorithm:
1. Extract the hash, length, and string from the name pa-
rameter.
2. Use the d_hash utility to find the correct hash bucket
(hlist_head) associated with theparentdentry.
3. Iterate through each dentry in the hash bucket in a loop.
4. For each dentry, perform the following checks:
a. First, compare the hash value with name->hash. If
they don’t match, skip to the next dentry.
b. Next, check if dentry->d_parent is the same as
the inputparent. If not, skip.
c. Perform a full name comparison: compare the
lengths ( dentry->d_name.len and name->len)
and then use memcmp to compare the string content.
If the names do not match, skip to the next dentry.
d. If all checks pass, verify that the dentry is not un-
hashed usingd_unhashed().
e. If it is not unhashed, this is a successful match.
Break the loop.
5. If a match was found, increment its d_count and return
it. Otherwise, returnNULL.
Phase 2: Concurrency Refinement.Please refine the above
dentry_lookup function to correctly handle locks for con-
currency. Please output only the resulting code. You can rely
on the following information.
[RELY]
Predefined Structures/Functions
// Enters an RCU read-side critical section
voidrcu_read_lock(void);
// Exits an RCU read-side critical section
voidrcu_read_unlock(void);
// Safely dereference a pointer in an RCU
critical section,→
structhlist_node* rcu_dereference(struct
hlist_node* p);,→
// Acquires a spinlock
voidspin_lock(spinlock_t *lock);
// Releases a spinlock
voidspin_unlock(spinlock_t *lock);
// Increment a counter atomicly
voidatomic_inc(atomic_t *v);
The locking algorithm for dentry_lookup has three main
components:
Component 1: RCU-Protected Traversal
Precondition:No RCU lock is held.
Postcondition:No RCU lock is held.
System Algorithm:
1. Before starting the search, call rcu_read_lock() to
enter an RCU critical section.
2. After the search is complete (whether a dentry is found
or not), call rcu_read_unlock() to exit the critical sec-
tion.
3. Pointers within the hash list must be accessed via
rcu_dereference() to ensure the most up-to-date
value is read safely.
Component 2: Per-Dentry Spinlock
Precondition:The code is inside an RCU read-side critical
section.
Postcondition:In all code paths after the lock has been ac-
quired (e.g., after a successful match, after a failed re-check,
or after a failed name comparison), the dentry->d_lock is
released.
System Algorithm:
1. Inside the hash list traversal loop, after finding a candi-
date dentry (i.e., its hash matches), acquire its individual
spinlock.
2. Critical Re-check:Immediately after acquiring the
lock, re-check that dentry->d_parent still points to
the parent you are searching under. If the parent no
longer matches, release the lock and continue to the next
dentry.
3. While holding the spinlock, perform the full, defini-
tive name comparison. The lock ensures that
dentry->d_namewill not change.
4. If the name matches and the dentry is not unhashed,
increment its reference count. This action must be per-
formed before releasing the lock.
USENIX Association 24th USENIX Conference on File and Storage Technologies    309
--- page 21 ---
Component 3: Atomic counter Incrementation
Precondition:No lock is held on the counter.
Postcondition:The counter of the dentry is atomicly incre-
mented. No lock is held on the counter.
B.2 Code Snippet
Phase 1: Initial Implementation.
structdentry * dentry_lookup(structdentry *
parent,structqstr * name) {,→
unsigned inthash = name->hash;
unsigned intlen = name->len;
const unsigned char*str = name->name;
structhlist_head *head = d_hash(parent, hash);
structhlist_node *node;
structdentry *found = NULL;
for(node = head->first; node != NULL; node =
node->next) {,→
structdentry *dentry = hlist_entry(node,
structdentry, d_hash);,→
if(dentry->d_name.hash != hash)
continue;
if(dentry->d_parent != parent)
continue;
if(dentry->d_name.len != len)
continue;
if(memcmp(dentry->d_name.name, str, len) !=
0),→
continue;
if(d_unhashed(dentry))
continue;
found = dentry;
break;
}
if(found) {
found->d_count.counter++;
returnfound;
}
returnNULL;
}
Phase 2: Refined Implementation.
structdentry * dentry_lookup(structdentry *
parent,structqstr * name) {,→
structhlist_node *node;
structdentry *found = NULL;
unsigned inthash = name->hash;
rcu_read_lock();
structhlist_head *head = d_hash(parent, hash);
for(node = rcu_dereference(head->first); node
!= NULL;,→
node = rcu_dereference(node->next)) {
structdentry *dentry = hlist_entry(node,
structdentry, d_hash);,→
if(dentry->d_name.hash != hash)
continue;
spin_lock(&dentry->d_lock);
if(dentry->d_parent != parent) {
spin_unlock(&dentry->d_lock);
continue;
}
if(dentry->d_name.len != name->len
memcmp(dentry->d_name.name, name->name,
name->len) != 0) {,→
spin_unlock(&dentry->d_lock);
continue;
}
if(d_unhashed(dentry)) {
spin_unlock(&dentry->d_lock);
continue;
}
atomic_inc(&dentry->d_count);
spin_unlock(&dentry->d_lock);
found = dentry;
break;
}
rcu_read_unlock();
returnfound;
}
C DAG-Structured Patches for Features
Fig.14 presents the DAG structures of patches used to imple-
ment the ten new features of SpecFS.
310    24th USENIX Conference on File and Storage Technologies USENIX Association
--- page 22 ---
lowlevel_file
Root Identifier
Leaf Node
Intermediate Node
lowlevel_file lowlevel_file
inode 
management
inode
initialization
inode & extent
structure
(a) Indirect Block(b) Inline Data (c) Extent
lowlevel_file
inode 
management
inode
initialization
mballoc
contiguous_malloc
(d) Multi Block Pre-Allocation
lowlevel_file
inode 
management
mballoc
(e) rbtree for Pre-Allocation
red-black tree
checksum
inode 
management
inode
initialization
inode with
checksum
lowlevel_file directory
operations
inline dataindirect block
extent
initialization
extent  
operations
extent
initialization
extent and prealloc
operations
prealloc with
rbtree
checksum
initialization
inode operations
with checksum
file operations
with checksum
directory operations
with checksum
(h) Metadata Checksum
timestamp
main_rename
main_dir
fuse interface
main_file
inode with
timestamps
outer interface for
rename operations
outer interface for
file operations
outer interface for
directory operations
outer interace for
fuse
(j) Timestamps
main_rename
main_dirmain_rename main_file
log_translog_rw
log_delete log_get flush_log
inode 
management
directory
operations
read/write log
with inode
operations
read/write log  
with directory
operations 
start/end
transactions at
rename interface 
start/end
transactions at
file interface 
start/end
transactions at
directory interface 
(i) Logging
contiguous_malloc delay_alloc
lowlevel_fileinode
initialization
inode with
buffer
(f) Delayed Allocation
initalize inode
with buffer
file operations with
delayed allocation
encryption &
decryption
lowlevel_fileinode
initialization
(g) Encryption
inode init with
en/decryption
file operations
with en/decryption
inode & extent
structure
inode & extent
structure
inode
initialization
extent
initialization
inode with key
Figure 14:Features implemented by SpecFS.For simplicity, a node in the figure may encompass multiple modules of specifications. “Root
Identifier” indicates that this node is the root node, along with its associated logic.
USENIX Association 24th USENIX Conference on File and Storage Technologies    311